Frank O’Hara’s “Personism: A Manifesto” (1959) can be read as a parody of Personalism, of related strands of 1950s American psychology, and of the poetry that developed alongside them.

Gordon W. Allport (1897-1967) created and taught the course “Personality: its Psychological and Social Aspects” at Harvard in 1924.

The course was the first at a U.S. college to treat personality theory as a discrete branch of psychology.

Allport joined Harvard’s psychology faculty in 1930, and, in 1937, published Personality: A Psychological Interpretation, which became the standard U.S. textbook of personality theory.

Allport’s 1954 book The Nature of Prejudice, which describes prejudice in terms of “In-Groups,” “Out-Groups,” “ego defenses” and “rejection,” arrived at the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement, and sold more than a half-million copies in the U.S. over the next 25 years.

When Allport’s Becoming: Basic Considerations for a Psychology of Personality was published the following year, it received more attention than a set of essays on personality theory normally would.

In Becoming, Allport elaborates the concept of the “proprium” (or self) partially through “Personalism,” a long-extant philosophical construct with multiple contradictory meanings.

Allport’s Personalism describes every mental function as embedded in “personal life”—there is no separable symbol processing or space perception; there are only people who have senses, feelings, and impressions.

The Personologist—a real Allport construct—asks “How shall a psychological life history be written?” and “What are the individual consistencies?”

Depth psychology “may plunge too deep”; “being in the moment” and “being present” are the keys to psychotherapy and to development.

Allport used the terms “proprium” and “Personalism” to distinguish his constructs from the nascent “Self” psychology of Heinz Kohut (1913-1981), and from work by Abraham Maslow (1908-1970).

In a 1943 paper titled “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Maslow adopted Kurt Goldstein’s concept of “self-actualization” and placed it atop a “hierarchy of human needs.”

Maslow defines “self-actualization” as “the desire for self-fulfillment, namely the tendency for man to become actualized in what he is potentially.”

Carl Rogers (1902-1987), in Client-Centered Therapy (1951), favors terminology whereby it is the “client” who “has within himself or herself vast resources for self-understanding, for altering his or her self-concept, attitudes and self-directed behavior,” which are resources that require “a definable climate of facilitative psychological attitudes” adding up to the “freedom to be.”

Allport’s “person” may have also been defined against Rogers’s “client.”

O’Hara, who graduated from Harvard in 1950, writes that he “founded” Personism “on August 27, 1959,” in conversation with Amiri Baraka.

“Personism: A Manifesto” was dated September 3, 1959 when it appeared in the magazine Yugen.

M.L. Rosenthal’s review of Robert Lowell’s Life Studies, titled “Poetry as Confession,” appeared in The Nation issue dated September 19, 1959.

Rosenthal chose the term “confession” to recall Lowell’s 1940 conversion to Catholicism, much discussed when Lowell won the 1947 Pulitzer Prize, at age 30, for Lord Weary’s Castle.

In his review, Rosenthal says that Life Studies contains the equivalent of “a series of personal confidences, rather shameful, that one is honor-bound not to reveal,” and that Lowell himself “seems to regard” the book as “soul’s therapy.”

In interviews at the time, Lowell said the composition of Life Studies was part of his psychotherapy.

“Everything is in the poems,” O’Hara says at the opening of “Personism” “but at the risk of sounding like the poor wealthy man’s Allen Ginsberg I will write to you because I just heard that one of my fellow poets thinks that a poem of mine that can’t be got at one reading is because I was confused too.

“Now, come on. I don’t believe in god, so I don’t have to make elaborately sounded structures.

“I hate Vachel Lindsay, always have; I don’t even like rhythm, assonance, all that stuff.”

The reference to believers creating “elaborately sounded structures” is probably a reference to Lowell and the highly-wrought Weary, and maybe to T.S. Eliot.

Vachel Lindsay, who committed suicide in 1931 by drinking Lysol (“They tried to get me—I got them first!”), was known as a socialist, and a moralist: “Would I might rouse the Lincoln in you all!”

The parsing of poetic form using traditional metrics (rhythm, assonance) was a hallmark of the New Critics.

O’Hara often delivered similar ripostes to the generation just slightly older than his: “Memorial Day 1950” contains the line “Our responsibilities did not begin/ in dreams, though they began in bed,” which inverts Delmore Schwartz’s “In Dreams Begin Responsibilities” (itself a borrowing from Yeats).

Other readings of Personism <a href="http://www.poets.org/viewmedia.php/prmMID/5908">look past parody</a> (and also note its engagement with Surrealist manifesto).

At a time when Allport was still at Harvard (where he taught until his death), John Ashbery wrote his undergraduate thesis for F.O. Matthiessen on Wallace Stevens’s “Chocorua to Its Neighbor.”

The poem, first published in 1933, was collected in 1947’s Transport to Summer (and is obliquely invoked in The Pisan Cantos).

Ashbery’s use of quotation throughout Some Trees, selected by W.H. Auden in 1956 for the Yale Younger Poets series, echoes the vatic emptiness of Chocorua’s reporting of what it heard from within a “shadow.”

Stevens and Ashbery have both, in somewhat different ways, been accused of being reactionary.

Stevens’s poetry was, in contemporary reviews, denounced as something like, in the self-description of John Wilkinson, neo-baroque flummery.

Robert Frost, probably thinking of Dorothy Parker’s 1928 poem, said that Stevens wrote poems about “Bric-a-Brac.”

And “Personism is to Wallace Stevens what la poésie pure was to Béranger.”

The conditions that produced Wallace Stevens have disappeared; the postmodern of Ashbery, as Joshua Clover has noted, has disappeared, or is disappearing.

The mainstream, or mainstreaming process, remains the same regardless of the system to which it is hooked up.

Mayakovsky was a mainstream poet.

Every era really does get the poetry it deserves, but description is not always subscription.

Though accused of it in his moment, Stevens does not refuse what Clover has called poetry’s task, or obligation: to “figure a disposition” toward “possession and dispossession.”

Possession and dispossession are the poles of the “fundamental antagonism” described systematically by Marx.

For now, possession and dispossession are constitutive of, and inextricable from, the conditions in which poetry is realized, “not eternal and abstract but concrete and historical,” longstanding and contingent.

The fundamental antagonism, itself historically contingent, manifests itself through sets of appearances, which are concrete, and which have been called maya, the Matrix, and the 10,000 things.

Lyric, as the discourse of constructing or staging voice (or its lack), has material dependencies, even if invisio-neuronal, like any form.

Material dependency, as the condition of poetry, entails a disposition toward the fundamental antagonism.

Material dependency renders a work that emerges from a default position, that fails to figure disposition toward dispossession, an incomplete expression.

The positions Stevens’s work actually seems to take with regard to the fundamental antagonism, or the period and place incidentals in which it clothes itself, aren’t what moves me in his work.

I don’t respond to the disposition, or dispositions, as a possible modality (or affective modality, if disposition is affect) for our, and even his, now.

I do have a nostalgia for the particular sets of conditions that Stevens isolated in his work.

Jack Spicer’s “practice of outside,” a name for a disposition, projects competing false sets of givens from multiple eras to block collapse into depiction.

The desire to reject obligation or entailment of any kind, poetic or otherwise, including that of staging a disposition, drives some poetry.

Ashbery’s non-staging of certain kinds of positions, as a refusal of any obligation of any kind, becomes a (well-documented) disposition in itself, one that refuses individualized transcendence as a final or outcome state.

In the commuter train sequence of Godard’s La Chinoise (1967), talk of revolution, especially that lacking an outcome plan for governance, is staged against art-based model-state dramatizing, and against conventional reformism, as a set of stale-mated impossibilities for destroying the antagonism.

The conclusion that the film seems to reach is that “this situation must change.”

In the commuter train sequence of Godard’s La Chinoise (1967), talk of revolution, especially that lacking an outcome plan for governance, is staged against art-based model-state dramatizing, and against conventional reformism, as a set of stale-mated impossibilities for destroying the antagonism.

The material sites of struggle between the possessed and dispossessed are subject to mistranslation along the very lines of struggle, of antagonism.

What it looks like to be dispossessed in Patna is obviously different from what it looks like in Passy or Paoli.

Less obviously, it is, always and at every point, difficult to communicate across manifestations of the 10,000 things.

Clover writes that “we need to clutch on to absolute antagonism (its essence)” in order to approach “[t]he irreducible kernel of solidarity.”

Toscano’s “Eco-Strato-Static,” from Collapsible Poetics Theatre, published by Fence Books in 2008, pulls out, like hitting the minus repeatedly on Google Maps, to show what micro-misunderstanding looks like at the macro.

Stacy Doris’s Cheerleader’s Guide to the World: Council Book (2006) shows the cyclical nature of appearance as human “formations/ and drills.”

Juliana Spahr stages the sex and death of sets of misapprehension and appearance in “The Incinerator” (2008).

In Jejuri (1974), Arun Kolatkar dilates the gap between appearance and maladaptive ideal.

The protagonist of La Chinoise returns to school and we never see her again.

On the subway, on my way to work, I watch everything flick back and forth between normalcy and mass effect, like a monstrous duck/rabbit.



