

“...Not your meaning of the word, but its meaning to the patient must govern its use. The latter must be most often constructed from the contexts in which the word occurs in the patient’s productions. When there are no data to help in this procedure, we are but bucking ourselves up to talk about ‘scattered speech,’ incoherence and so forth. In general, it is wise to be very wary of conclusions based upon the use by a patient of words well known to be highly ambiguous, or very diffuse in reference.” — Harry Stack Sullivan: “The Peculiarity of Thought in Schizophrenia” American Journal of Psychiatry 82 (1925-26): 21-86.

Harry Stack Sullivan was Director of Clinical Research at Sheppard and Enoch Pratt Hospital in Towson, Maryland from 1925 until 1930.

Using a microphone “concealed by an ornamental piece” on his desk, Sullivan recorded his analytic sessions with some patients. With “The Peculiarity of Thought in Schizophrenia,” Sullivan was the first to publish case histories that included long passages of transcribed schizophrenic discourse.

“Well, you’re smoking . . . you’re burning . . . your building is burning down . . . . symbolizes a cigar. . . . in my mind     . . . it symbolizes man.

“I was . . . in there . . . shooting some pool . . . I was in there shooting French . . . and . . . I . . . touches . . . What’s his name put the 3-ball in the pocket.

“I slept with my brother ‘till after the war * * * that homosexual feeling H— spoke of. I’d tell him . . . anything, and . . it seemed I got worse and worse. All our actions and talks were tensions between us, you see. It was on the morning of the eclipse . . . I was relating it to myself . . . and the morning it came, I was wild, I thought I was dying or something. * * * I was supposed to be in hell, I guess . . . and they had a language there; I’d hear things . . . I couldn’t smoke a cigarette or drink water.”

In “Peculiarity,” Sullivan describes the onset of schizophrenia as the failure of “adjustment” in young men.

For Sullivan, “factors” in 1920s American society conspired to “effect castration of the boy” who, “loaded with dogma completely divorced from his biological necessities,” is “taught more or less clearly that his hand on his penis is his hand against God….”

The boy is thus “confronted by a problem of no mean proportions” and “[i]t is not strange that such boys attempt to carry on the late juvenile attitudes and to satisfy the new impulses by the stimuli obtainable from members of their own sex. But this usually requires, in our so advanced society, an infinity of rationalizations.”

Sullivan's interpretation is in line with Freud's characterization of homosexuality as a kind of arrested development, but Sullivan adds a coda that suggests that what is at stake is more than "stimuli":

“Moreover, the homosexual love object all too frequently fails to ‘stay put,’ and the youth is subjected to one disappointment after another.”

Section 000-x63 of DSM I reserves a diagnosis of “deviant sexuality” for “patients” who exhibit “homosexuality” that is not related to “more extensive syndromes, such as schizophrenia and obsessional reactions,” of which “homosexuality” is also seen as part.

John Ashbery’s “A Boy” can be read as an ironic comment on the American midcentury’s tying together of homosexuality and schizophrenia: “He/ Couldn’t Lie. He’d tell ‘em by their syntax.”

Italics as voiceover. Voiceover as normative.

According John Shoptaw, John Ashbery wrote “A Boy” after seeing John Huston’s film adaptation of The Red Badge of Courage (1951). The film, which stars a young Audie Murphy, is a movie about adjustment.

Voiceover at film’s beginning: “Stephen Crane wrote The Red Badge of Courage in 1894. From the moment it was published, it was accepted by critics and public alike as a classic story of war, and of the boys and men who fought war. Stephen Crane wrote his book when he was a boy of 22. Its publication made him a man. Its story is of a boy who, frightened, went into a battle and came out of it… a man with courage. More than that, it is a story of many frightened boys who went into a great Civil War and came out… as a nation, of united, strong, and free men.”

Within schizophrenia, Sullivan argues, language has a “peculiar” relationship to thought, being simultaneously the means of association and dissociation in interpersonal relationships. If a shared language is part of the social contract, then the schizophrenic's inability to produce discourse conforming to expectations of exchange is major source of his or her estrangement.

Shoptaw calls “A Boy” “a tense encounter in which patriarchal and nationalist pressures are deflected.” He finds this deflection particularly in the deployment of “the homophonic, homophobic stereotype audible in [the poem's] last line,” where we hear “mincing fag” for what’s actually there: “mincing flag.”

Shoptaw points to “flag” as a “crypt” word. Such “cryptography,” he argues, “cannot be equated with concealment.” That is particularly true given the extent to which crude neo-Freudian interpretation, where “this” really means “that,” had become part of American popular culture, particularly as it pertained to homosexuality.

Recall Carl Luce explaining to Holden Caulfield, in The Catcher in the Rye (1951), that Luce's analyst father had helped Luce make certain “adjustments,” along with Holden's suspicions that Luce was a “flit” to begin with.

In the poem, the signs are intentionally exaggerated. The third stanza's “vast electrical disturbance” parodies camp Victoriana, as an older queen winkingly propositions the boy, who delivers the next line as knowing twink.

The non-accretive discourse of “A Boy” resembles the schizophrenic discourse published and evaluated by Sullivan. The poem tells its readers to locate its queerness there—to tell it by its syntax.

If to be “homosexual” in the mid-20th century U.S. was to have a criminalized pathology, one associated with schizophrenia, then a deliberate display of schizophrenia’s characteristic linguistic manifestation was a form of resistance.

Shoptaw writes that “[the poem] finally raises the white badge of cowardice. The author behind these strange lines never quite surrenders them to understanding.”

Yet as “patriarchal and nationalist pressures” come to bear on the boy, he must pony up his identity in language as if to a house subcommittee.

“An unendurable age” is a double-entendre covering the boy's adolescence and the homophobic culture of early-50’s America.

The poem’s critique of adjustment is accomplished through its style.
